..
   # *******************************************************************************
   # Copyright (c) 2026 Contributors to the Eclipse Foundation
   #
   # See the NOTICE file(s) distributed with this work for additional
   # information regarding copyright ownership.
   #
   # This program and the accompanying materials are made available under the
   # terms of the Apache License Version 2.0 which is available at
   # https://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0
   #
   # SPDX-License-Identifier: Apache-2.0
   # *******************************************************************************
.. _docs_bazel-macros:

Bazel macro: ``docs``
=====================

The ``docs`` macro defined in ``docs.bzl`` is a convenience wrapper
that creates a small set of Bazel targets
to build, verify and preview the project's Sphinx documentation,
and to create a Python virtual environment for IDE support (Esbonio).

See :doc:`commands <commands>` for the targets/commands it creates.

The macro must be called from the repository root package.

Minimal example (root ``BUILD``)
--------------------------------

.. code-block:: python

   load("//:docs.bzl", "docs")

   docs(
       source_dir = "docs",
       data = [
           # labels to any extra tools or data you want included
           # e.g. "//:needs_json" or other tool targets
       ],
       deps = [
           # additional bazel labels providing Python deps or other runfiles
       ],
   )

- ``name`` (string, default: ``"docs"``)
  Name of the main documentation target. When left at its default, all generated targets
  keep their historical, unprefixed names (``needs_json``, ``sourcelinks_json``,
  ``docs_check``, ``ide_support``, etc.) for backward compatibility. For any other name,
  every generated target is prefixed with it, e.g. ``name = "foo"`` yields ``foo``,
  ``foo_check``, ``foo_needs_json``, ``foo_sourcelinks_json``, ``foo_ide_support``, and so on.

  Use a custom ``name`` when you need to call ``docs()`` more than once in the same
  ``BUILD`` file (e.g. to build two independent documentation sets); each call must then
  use a distinct ``name``.

  .. code-block:: python

     docs(
         name = "foo",
         source_dir = "docs_foo",
     )

  If you use a custom ``name`` and also rely on non-Bazel execution (e.g. Esbonio/IDE
  support via ``ide_support``), set ``docs_target_name = "foo"`` in that ``source_dir``'s
  ``conf.py`` to match, so the tooling can resolve the correctly-prefixed runfiles and
  Bazel targets outside of a ``bazel run`` invocation.

- ``source_dir`` (string, default: ``"docs"``)
  Path (relative to repository root) to your Sphinx source directory. This is the folder
  that contains your ``conf.py`` and the top-level ReST/markdown sources.

- ``data`` (list of bazel labels)
  Extra runfiles / data targets that should be made available to the documentation targets.
  Typical entries are targets that generate or provide external data used by the docs, for
  example a ``:needs_json`` producer. The items in ``data`` are added to the py_binaries and
  to the Sphinx tooling so they are available at build time.

- ``deps`` (list of bazel labels)
  Additional Bazel dependencies to add to the Python binaries and the virtual environment
  target. Use this to add project-specific Python modules.

  If you don't provide the necessary Sphinx packages,
  this function adds its own (but checks for conflicts).

- ``scan_code`` (list of bazel labels)
  Source code targets to scan for traceability tags (``req-Id:`` annotations).
  Used to generate the source-code-link JSON that maps tags back to source files.

- ``metamodel`` (bazel label, optional)
  Path to a custom ``metamodel.yaml`` file.
  When set, the ``score_metamodel`` extension loads **this file instead of** the default metamodel.
  The label is automatically added to the ``data`` and ``tools`` of every generated target
  so the file is available in the Bazel sandbox at build time.

  Example:

  .. code-block:: python

     docs(
         source_dir = "docs",
         metamodel = "//:my_metamodel.yaml",
     )

  The custom ``metamodel.yaml`` must follow the same schema as the default one
  (see :doc:`score_metamodel </internals/extensions/metamodel>`).
  You may use ``@score_docs_as_code//src/extensions/score_metamodel:metamodel_yaml``
  for extension processing.
  When ``metamodel`` is omitted the default metamodel is used unchanged.

Edge cases
----------

- If your Sphinx ``conf.py`` expects files generated by other Bazel targets, make sure those
  targets are included in the ``data`` list so they are available to the build driver.
- The experimental "combo" targets rewrite some ``data`` labels for combined builds; those
  are intended for advanced use and are optional for normal doc workflows.
- If you depend on another module's ``docs()`` output via ``data``, and that module used a
  custom ``name``, reference its prefixed target (e.g. ``@other_repo//:foo_needs_json``)
  instead of the default ``needs_json``.
